Well, I had started graduate work at Princeton in
1941, and the major professor was Professor
Wigner, W-I-G-N-R. And after
Pearl Harbor, of course, there was a lot of
additional work in this field, and they decided to
concentrate the theoretical and experimental
work on nuclear piles at the University of
Chicago. So, physics professors from several
universities around the country went there. Two
of them from Princeton went, Professor Wheeler
and Professor Wigner that I was working with. And
he took me along with him at that time. Before you
went, did you know what type of research was going
on there and what its ultimate goal was at that
time? Well, it depends what you mean by the
ultimate goal. We had worked on this some back at
Princeton and we thought that it was the primary
purpose was to make nuclear power plants and also
to as a byproduct, make some of the fissionable
materials, which might have some other
applications, which was rather, well, it wasn't
dwelt upon what it might be. And it wasn't actually
until, oh, I suppose 1944 or 45, early 45, that many
of us realized that it had anything to do with the
bomb. Is that right? Yeah. So you thought you were
still... working primarily toward power rather
than a weapons use. Right. It's amazing, but
that's true. Okay. What exactly was your role
there at the University of Chicago as related to
the first reactor? Well, I was the assistant to
Professor Bigner, and we did a lot of the early
calculations about how reactors work and what
happens to the neutrons after they come out of the
atom that undergoes fission, how they are slowed
down by the carbon, all of these piles at that time
were made of carbon with cylinders of uranium in
them. Okay. We set the scene prior to 2nd of
December 1942 and include the problems of getting
enough fissionable material whether to use
graphite or heavy water to slow down the neutrons
or any other major problems that were going on at
the time? Well, there were many.
Well, just about anything you mentioned there. In
the first place, they decided to try to do it with
natural uranium. because there just wasn't
enough enriched uranium at that time. So that
meant that you had to have the uranium in
cylinders, and you had to have something around
the uranium that slowed down the neutrons to
thermal energy sufficiently. And as you say,
probably the two main candidates were carbon and
heavy water. I think, again, it was just a question
that there wasn't that much heavy water available
at that time. There were very small quantities,
but you need a lot for a reactor. Yeah, I read in The
New World by Hewlett and Anderson that they only
had a small quantity in Canada, in a plant in
Canada, even though it was a much preferred
material over carbon. But they just couldn't
manufacture enough at the time of the experiment.
And the carbon reactor was very easy to build. Its
only disadvantage was it had to be considerably
larger than the heavy water one. Why is that, that
it has to be larger? Well, just because it doesn't
slow down the neutrons as efficiently, and it has
somewhat higher absorption of the neutrons than
the carbon.
The smaller a reactor is, of course, the more loss
of neutrons you have, out of the sides relative to
the number you're making. So if you have a more
inefficient moderator, you've got to have a
larger reactor. OK. The material then, did you all
end up using uranium-235, or did you use natural
uranium-238? No, it was just natural uranium. So
it involved a lot of uranium then. A lot of uranium
and a lot of carbon. And they were doing this under
very strict security there. It was all done under
the old stadium at the University of Chicago,
which when I first went there had been squash
courts, a game they like to play in the Northeast,
but not in Texas, I guess. Like racquetball down
here. It's very similar, I think. The ball doesn't
bounce in squash. I've played it several times.
The first time I got the ball, I was going to play,
and I dropped the ball, and it just didn't bounce.
Yeah. Well, I don't know if I can play this. But you
can really get that ball going fast. I played it
some before they abolished the squash courts to
make the reactor. It was the only large place they
could find to do it. So they did this under the old
football stands at the university. They... only
had a small number of people cleared with a
security clearance to do this work. And you didn't
have any manual laborers at all, because you
didn't have anybody of that sort with clearance.
So all the graduate students, including myself,
were drafted to do things like carry the blocks of
carbon onto the pile and so on. And this was heavy,
dirty work. Yeah, I understand the carbon. real
messy, and it was real slick. Right. I ruined a pair
of shoes doing
that. Can you tell me about the actual reaction
when it actually happened to include the guys in
the suicide squad with the buckets of cadmium
solution?
I don't know as I remember exactly who that was.
I haven't thought of this for a long time. It's in
some of the standard accounts, of course. Yes. But
what was their purpose, the Suicide Squad? Well,
just to be sure the thing didn't blow up, it was
completely unchartered territory. And although
everybody thought they'd taken account of
everything in the calculations that could be
taken account of, how could you really be sure? And
so as an additional safety precaution, they had
these people there with cadmium in solution,
which is a very strong absorber of neutrons. And if
anything went wrong, they were to dump it on the
pile, which supposedly would have absorbed the
excess neutrons and helped stop whatever was
happening that shouldn't. But it didn't go that
way. Everything worked just beautifully. They
very slowly withdrew the control rods, which of
course absorb neutrons too, and as they pull them
out, why, the number of neutrons in the pile goes
up. And it just went up on a beautiful exponential
curve. Right with the calculations in it? Yeah,
yeah.
Okay, so the reaction, how long did it take from the
time you started removing the rods until they
decided that the factor was one, that it was a
self-sustaining reaction?
Oh, dear.
If I had to guess after this long time, I'd say it was
five or ten minutes, probably. Is that right?
Yeah. Okay. A. H. Compton, in his book, Atomic
Quest, watches three people's faces during the
reaction. Enrico Fermi, who was cool, in control,
and showed no sign of elation. Balney Wilson, who
looked troubled because of the destruction that
reaction implied. And Crawford Greenwald, later
the president of DuPont, the look of a man who had
seen a miracle, a source of endless power. Did any
of these fit your reaction? Do you remember what
came to your mind when y'all actually had a
self-sustaining reaction?
Well, I suspect he's reading a lot into the faces of
those three people in terms of what he knows about
the people.
Well, I suspect a little bit of all those things. It
certainly was a very humbling moment.
One certainly did a good bit of thinking about
where all this was taking one. But as I say, at that
point, at least those of us who were graduate
students didn't know anything about the
tremendous destructive potential that was
possible.
What type of work did you do after the reaction?
After that famous day? Well, I just continued
doing theoretical work about it. There were just
many, many different things that needed to be
worked out to understand it better. And then they
were also, of course, looking at better ways to
make nuclear reactors with other substances and
other configurations. Did you give any
consideration in going to Los Alamos? No, it was
never suggested that this particular group would
go. I see.
So they already had a core of people there that they
were going to work with? Yeah, now some of the very
top physicists that were at Chicago eventually
ended up at Los Alamos. And I think they may have
taken a few of their own graduate students with
them. But no one that was in the group I was in went
there. In fact, we knew very little about it
because, again, they tried to keep all these
places separate for secret series. Well, did that
inhibit you then in your research, since
obviously at the University of California you had
one group of people? What, at Princeton and
Cornell they had a group? The University of
Chicago? I
think after, say, the end of 1942,
there weren't these groups at all these
universities. There was the group at the
University of Chicago that did piles. There was
the group at Oak Ridge that did the diffusion of the
isotopes. There was a group at Los Alamos that did
the weapons.
And that was about it, wasn't it? Yeah, those were
the main ones as far as from what I've read in
directing to actually get the weapon. Everything
I've read, that's the whole, it seemed like that
was, you could say that's the whole ball of wax.
They were all going toward a weapon,
which now I'm sort of surprised when you told me
that you all thought the major thrust of your
research was for power. Yeah. Yeah, I don't think
it was at least until the end of the 40s. that maybe
you have to suspect there might be a lot more to
it. Okay, with the research going on in the
Superbomb, the FAST reactor project, the large
Van de Graaff accelerator, why did so many
scientists leave the lab at Los Alamos after 1945?
Was it because they felt their job was over, or the
uncertainty of the lab's future? Do you know about
some of the feelings of the people who left there?
Well, I suppose there may have been many different
reasons, but I suspect that a lot of them were just
university scientists that wanted to get back to
their own research labs and work on their own
projects again after doing this big general
project. When I first looked at the members of the
Atomic Energy Commission, it was Mr. Pike from the
Security Exchange Commission, Lilienthal from
the Tennessee Valley Authority, Wayne Rack, a
newspaper editor, Strauss, who was a partner in
Kuhn, Loeb & Company, and the only scientist was
Robert Baish from Cornell. Why was there such a
lack of scientists on the Atomic Energy
Commission when it first formed? I haven't any
idea. You think it was just a political commission
then? No idea on that. I really don't know that.
What role did the Atomic Energy Commission play in
encouraging nuclear research? You mean during
the war or after? After the war, yes. Well, of
course, they started funding research at many
universities, so in that sense they certainly
encouraged university research.
And they did continue to make Los Alamos quite an
attractive place for a scientist to be. In what
respect did they do that? Just the number of
projects they had going on there? Yeah, they had a
lot of projects, good financing, and a lot of
famous people around which you could contact and
discuss ideas with and so on. I spent one summer
there a few years after the war. It was really sort
of fantastic, all the great physicists that were
coming in and out all the time. What did you work on
there that summer? Can you tell me? Yeah, it really
didn't have anything to do with what they were
primarily interested in. It was just a new way of
formulating the theory of gravity.
So it takes care of the Atomic Energy Commission.
Why was the development of atomic power plants so
slow at this time when compared to research on
weapons? Even after the war, the material I've
read, a lot of the efforts were directed toward
more bigger, better weapons and not towards power
plants. Were the engineering and technical
aspects just that tremendous or untenable or...
Or why was it the emphasis on weapons rather than
power?
I don't know because I'm really competent to
answer that. I suppose.
The considerable amount of this was funded by
military funds, and this necessarily gave it a
push in that direction.
They felt that was the more urgent problem.
We obviously haven't had an energy shortage in
this country until recent years, and so that
wasn't an urgent problem.
familiar with the Price Anderson Act, where they
will fund, I think it's 75 to something less than
all but $96 million if there's
an accident at nuclear power plants. The federal
government will fund, you know, it's like
insurance. Do you think that had some effect then
on increasing research in power plants and
bringing more power plants online afterwards?
Well, I'm sure encouraged bringing more online.
Do you think that had anything to do with the
increased number of cyclotrons and synchrotrons
and other accelerators? Do you think research for
power reactors had more to do with that than, say,
research for weapons. And having more
accelerators built? Yes. I doubt if there's a
tremendous connection
there. There isn't that much you can do with
accelerators to
elucidate what's happening with reactors. I
suppose you need to measure a lot of these
cross-sections better.
I think the main reason all the accelerators were
built at universities is just that there was a lot
of new nuclear physics, and the physicists wanted
to
do them. I remember they built one here.
They were originally going to build one in West
Virginia or something like that. And the guy in
charge of the Atomic Energy Commission at the time
was from Texas A&M. Oh, really? Yeah. So that's how
we got our cyclotron. He redirected it down here.
They had the whole scene set up there. I'm pretty
sure it was either the University of Virginia or
the University of West Virginia. They had
everything. I actually had a site funded in the
whole business. And then they changed the line
just because this guy was an Aggie, and they built
the cyclotron here instead of there. I was
surprised to read that, too. After reading parts
of the reactor safety study by the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission and the review of that by
the Union of Concerned Scientists, I was
surprised at the odds of some types of reactor
accidents occurring and the damage that would
occur. Do you think reactors are relatively safe
as a physicist? I think so. I think so. The problems
are all really engineering ones of water pipes
that spring leaks and, you know, just
down-to-earth daily problems of that sort. And
there are just so many engineering problems of
that sort. So it's not really a scientific problem
when you get down to it. No. What improvements do
you think they could make as far as nuclear
reactors?
Well, I don't know if there's really that much. I
think it's more a question of having well-trained
operators and having them built well and being
sure there are no defects in these materials when
they go in. It seems to me that's where they've
gotten in trouble in all the cases where they have.
Okay. The scope of the study was real narrow, only
quantifying the The risks from the reactor
itself, nothing to do with mining, enrichment,
transportation. Are these problems just too
large, or are the risks insignificant?
From those aspects, the mining aspects and
enrichment, moving it from one place to the next,
do you think that those present a risk Probably
more than the reactor itself, or very little risk
at all. Well, of course, anything a human does
involves some risk.
I know that you see studies that have been made of
the risk in getting a ton of coal to burn in your
power plant. Some people claim that more lives are
lost doing this than could possibly have in
getting the same amount of energy from a nuclear
reactor.
Now, the things you're speaking of here are really
essentially the same things you have in
transporting coal, aren't they? Yeah, mining is
just as dangerous. Mining isn't a great
occupation. Okay. And the final thing is, did the
scientists who were in that room on the 2nd of
December, did they bear any of the responsibility
for the proliferation of nuclear weapons or
accidents from reactors?
Well, some of them, of course, formed the
Federation of Atomic Scientists. I think that's
been quite a political force and has been quite a
lot through the years. educating people,
particularly the legislators, as to what should
happen. I suspect that's the main positive thing
they've done, other than just individually
giving talks and things like that. It's hard. So
the main, uh, you feel that the main reason then for
this type of, uh, for all the main nuclear
research, the only way you can have it is with
federal funding and that most of the things that
come about from it are things that the only reason
for them is because of the direction that the
research has got to go because of the funding
that's involved to begin with. In other words, you
know, for military purposes, is that the reason
that we have a lot of nuclear weapons? Because the
funding in nuclear research came from the
Department of Defense rather than from, let's
say, the Department of Energy now. Well, are we
talking about just this narrow field or all of
nuclear physics research? All of nuclear physics
research. Well, I think this is just this very
small part of that. And although the Department of
Defense funds some of it, I don't think they're the
major source of funds anymore. The Department of
Energy has funded a great deal of it.
Other agencies of the government.
Well, thank you very much, Dr. Foss. I enjoyed it.